# Hello Puppet

## Quest objectives

- Familiarize yourself with this guide and the `quest` tool.
- Install the Puppet agent on a newly provisioned node.
- Use `puppet resource` and `facter` to inspect and modify the user accounts
  on your new node.

## Get started

> Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.

> - Arthur C. Clarke

Welcome to the Quest Guide for the Puppet Learning VM. This guide will be
your companion as you make your way through a series of interactive quests,
using the accompanying VM as a sandbox environment to exercise your Puppet
skills.

This first quest will start by introducing you to the `quest` tool you will use
to set up your environment on the VM prior to each quest and track your
progress through each task covered in this guide.

Once you're familiar with the quest tool, we'll move on to Puppet itself.
You'll learn how to install the Puppet agent on a newly provisioned node and
use `puppet resource` and `facter` to explore the state of that new system.
These tools help you understand any server in your infrastructure in terms of
*resources* and *facts*, the fundamental units of information Puppet uses to
manage a system.

As you get started with this guide, remember that Puppet is a powerful
and complex tool. We will explain concepts as needed to complete and understand
each task in a quest, but will occasionally introduce a topic that needs to
wait for a later quest for a full explanation. (We can avoid dependency cycles
in code, but it's not always possible to keep them out of learning materials!)

Ready to get started? Run the following command on your Learning VM:

    quest begin hello_puppet

## An introduction to the quest tool

Each time you start a new quest, the `quest` tool uses Puppet to set up
everything you'll need to complete that quest. In this case, it created new
containerized node that we will use to guide you through the Puppet agent
installation.

The `quest` tool has some other features that will help you keep on track as
you work through this guide. You can use the `--help` flag to list the
available subcommands.

<div class = "lvm-task-number"><p>Task 1:</p></div>

    quest --help

As you entered that command, you might have noticed that the status line in the
bottom right of your terminal changed. This status line helps you keep track of
your progress through the tasks in each quest.

<div class = "lvm-task-number"><p>Task 2:</p></div>

To see a more detailed list of these tasks, use the `status` subcommand. 

    quest status

## The Puppet agent

The Puppet agent is the piece of the Puppet setup that lives on the systems you
want to manage. Whenever the Puppet agent runs, it asks the Puppet master for a
catalogâ€”a description of what its system should look like. It compares this
catalog to the actual state of the system, then makes any changes needed to
make the actual state match the state described in the catalog.

The Learning VM already has a Puppet master pre-installed. To try out a Puppet
agent run, we'll need to install the Puppet agent on the new node the we set up
for this quest. The Puppet master hosts an install script you can easily run
from your agent node that can connect to it.

<div class = "lvm-task-number"><p>Task 3:</p></div>

First, use `ssh` to connect to your node:

    ssh root@hello.learning.puppetlabs.vm

Then paste in the following command to run the agent installer:

    curl -k https://learning.puppetlabs.vm:8140/packages/current/install.bash | bash

(Note that you can find full documentation of the agent installation process,
including specific instructions for Windows and other operating systems on the
[docs page](https://docs.puppet.com/pe/latest/install_agents.html))

## Resources and Facts

At the core of Puppet is something called the *resource abstraction layer*.
for Puppet, each bit of the system you want to manage (a user, file, service,
or package, to give some common examples) can be represented in Puppet code as
a unit called a *resource*. Puppet can translate back and forth between this
Puppet code representation of a resource and the native tools and data of the
system where it's running. This ability to use the same consistent language to
handle resources with different tools and across different operating systems is
the *abstraction* we're talking about in *resource abstraction layer*.

A program called `facter` is a key tool that makes this resource abstraction
possible. As its name suggests, `facter` collects data about a system and makes
them availale to Puppet (and you) as a set of structured facts.

<div class = "lvm-task-number"><p>Task 4:</p></div>

Let's take a look at `facter`.

If you're not connected to your agent node, use SSH to reconnect.

    ssh root@hello.learning.puppetlabs.vm

Now use `facter` to see the OS data available on this node:

    facter os

The data output will include everything `facter` knows about the OS and its
architecture.

    {
      architecture => "x86_64",
      family => "RedHat",
      hardware => "x86_64",
      name => "CentOS",
      release => {
        full => "7.1.1503",
        major => "7",
        minor => "1"
      },
      selinux => {
        enabled => false
      }
    }

<div class = "lvm-task-number"><p>Task 5:</p></div>

You can also dig in to this data to pull out specific facts. Try getting the


    facter os.name

'facter' helps
Puppet know which native tools it should use on the system and can be used with
conditionals in Puppet code to select correct software and configuration
options.

(You can also explicitly specify which package manager Puppet should use. For
example, on a Windows system you can choose to use Chocolatey instead of the
native Windows tools to install from an MSI or EXE.)

<div class = "lvm-task-number"><p>Task 4:</p></div>

Configuring the Network Time Protocol (NTP) service is a common first step in
managing your infrastructure. Let's check if the NTP package is installed.
Because you're on an Ubuntu system, you can use `dpkg`:

    dpkg -s ntp

Now that you have the Puppet agent installed, you can also use the `puppet
resource` tool to do the same check wihout considering the operating system of
the node you happen to be connected to:

    puppet resource package ntp

<div class = "lvm-task-number"><p>Task 5:</p></div>

To set up NTP on your infrastructure, you'll likely want to configure a server
that the `other nodes in your infrastructure will coordinate with. With the
simple two-node network we're using for this quest, we might nominate the
Puppet master node to run this service as well.

Let's exit our SSH session and check the status of the NTP package on
our Puppet master:

    exit

Again, use `facter` to find the `os.name` fact:

    facter os.name

You'll see that you're now on a CentOS system. This means that you need to use
`rpm` instead of `dpkg`:

    rpm -qa | grep ntp

But you can also just use `puppet resource` again:

    puppet resource package ntp

## Modifying resources

While using `facter` and `puppet resource` to get information about a system is
convenient, the real power of Puppet's resource abstraction layer is that it
can also make changes. Not only can it translate the state of your system into
a Puppet resource, but it can also use a resource as a model for making changes
on your system.

You already saw that the NTP package was installed on your Puppet master, so
let's take a look at the NTP daemon service.

    puppet resource service ntpd

You'll see that the service is stopped and not enabled.

    service { 'ntpd':
      ensure => 'stopped',
      enable => 'false',
    }

Let's change that. Instead of using the full Puppet code syntax you see in the
output of the `puppet resource` command, we can use a shorthand to directly
set the key-value pairs of the resource and apply those changes to the system.

    puppet resource service ntpd ensure='running' enable='true'

Puppet will notify you of the changes it has made and show the new state of the
`ntpd` resource.

    Notice: /Service[ntpd]/ensure: ensure changed 'stopped' to 'running'
    service: { 'ntpd':
      ensure => 'running',
      enable => 'true',
    }

Note that you didn't have to worry about implementation details here. Puppet
knew to use Systemd commands to start the service because we're on CentOS 7. If
we had been on Centos 6, it would have used SysVinit.

There are some configuration details we would normally want to adjust in
`/etc/ntp.conf`. When we get to the next quest, we'll address how you can
easily manage this kind of configuration with Puppet. For now, though, we'll
settle for directing our agent node to use the master as its NTP server.

SSH to your agent node:

    ssh root@hello.learning.puppetlabs.vm

Take a look at the configuration file.

    vim /etc/ntp.conf

You'll see that there are several default servers already specified.

    server 0.ubuntu.pool.ntp.org
    server 1.ubuntu.pool.ntp.org
    server 2.ubuntu.pool.ntp.org
    server 3.ubuntu.pool.ntp.org

NTP is more reliable if it can poll multiple servers, so we'll leave in those
first three defaults, but we can replace the third with 
`learning.puppetlabs.vm` and tell NTP to prefer this server. There are several
ways to manage configuration files with Puppet that we'll address in a later
quest, but for now, go ahead and edit the configuration by hand. (If you're not
used to Vim, note that you'll need to type `i` to enter insert mode.) Replace
the `server 3.ubuntu.pool.ntp.org` line with:

    server learning.puppetlabs.vm prefer

Once you've made your change, save and exit Vim. (To do this, you first exit
insert mode with `ESC`, then type `:wq` and hit enter. That's `:` to get a
command prompt within Vim, then `w` to write the file and `q` to quit.)

With your configuration set, use the `puppet resource` tool to start the `ntp`
service. Note that while the resource abstraction layer will figure out how to
manage resources on different systems, you still have to be aware of variations
in the names of things like services and packages. In this case, the service is
called `ntp` on Ubuntu, and `ntpd` on CentOS. (You'll see in later quests how
Puppet modules can still help you handle this kind of variation.)

    puppet resource service ntp ensure='running'

Now check to see the updated list of peers NTP is connected to:

    ntpq -p

## Review

Nice work, you've completed your first quest on your way to Puppet mastery!

We reviewed the `quest begin` `quest --help` and `quest status` commands that
you'll be using throughout this guide to keep your progress on the VM
coordinated with the quests and tasks you read here.

We also covered the the installation of the Puppet agent on a new node using an
install script hosted on the Puppet master.

With that new node set up, you learned about the *resource abstraction layer*,
a key Puppet concept. You used `facter` to view system facts, and used the
`puppet resource` tool to investigate and modify the state of the `ntp` package
and `ntpd` serivce.

In the next quest, you will build on this foundation by using the PE console
to fully automate NTP on your infrastructure.
